feat(docs): KEP-2437-Support Volcano Scheduler in Kubeflow Trainer V2 (#2672)
kubeflow/training-operator: docs/proposals/2437-volcano-scheduler/README.md

- **Manage PodGroups**
   - Update: Update PodGroups and perform rescheduling when there are changes in cluster resource demands (e.g., changes in `LimitRange`).
   - Suspended/Resumed: Support scheduling for suspended and resumed training jobs, with special handling of suspended jobs to ensure no new pods are started. (TrainJob may be set to suspend in its configuration or manually paused by the user.)
- **Binding**: Bind PodGroups to TrainJobs, with their life cycle controlled by the TrainJob. For example, when a TrainJob is deleted, the associated PodGroup is also deleted.
- **Apply PodGroups to the Cluster**: Submit PodGroup resources and associated scheduling configurations, allowing Volcano to manage pod scheduling.

Note: The plugin is responsible only for configuring scheduling parameters, building and managing PodGroups. The actual scheduling management is handled by external schedulers (**volcano-controller**).

### Volcano Scheduling API

Currently, scheduling strategy parameters are set in the `PodGroupPolicy` of the `TrainingRuntimeSpec`. We introduce a new configuration struct, `VolcanoPodPolicySource`, which extends the existing `PodGroupPolicySource`:

> ```golang
> // Only one of its members may be specified.
> type PodGroupPolicySource struct {
> 	Coscheduling *CoschedulingPodGroupPolicySource `json:"coscheduling,omitempty"`
> 	// Volcano plugin from the Volcano scheduler for gang-scheduling and advanced queue-based scheduling.
> 	Volcano      *VolcanoPodPolicySource      `json:"volcano,omitempty"`
> }
> 
> // VolcanoPodPolicySource configures scheduling behavior for Volcano.
> type VolcanoPodPolicySource struct {
>     // Queue name in Volcano. Defaults to "default" queue with the lowest weight.
> 	Queue *string `json:"queue,omitempty"`
> 
>     // PriorityClassName sets PodGroup priority. Optional.
>     // "system-node-critical" and "system-cluster-critical" are special keywords with the highest priorities.
>     PriorityClassName *string `json:"priorityClassName,omitempty"`
> }
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```golang
// Only one of its members may be specified.
type PodGroupPolicySource struct {
        // Coscheduling plugin from the Kubernetes scheduler-plugins for gang-scheduling.
	Coscheduling *CoschedulingPodGroupPolicySource `json:"coscheduling,omitempty"`

	// Volcano plugin from the Volcano scheduler for gang-scheduling and advanced queue-based scheduling.
	Volcano      *VolcanoPodPolicySource      `json:"volcano,omitempty"`
}

// VolcanoPodPolicySource configures scheduling behavior for Volcano.
type VolcanoPodPolicySource struct {
        // Queue name in Volcano. Defaults to "default" queue with the lowest weight.
	Queue *string `json:"queue,omitempty"`

        // PriorityClassName sets PodGroup priority. Optional.
        // "system-node-critical" and "system-cluster-critical" are special keywords with the highest priorities.
        PriorityClassName *string `json:"priorityClassName,omitempty"`
}
```
```

Referring to implement of **Coscheduling**, we update the scheduling queue in the following two cases:

- `RuntimeClass` changes. If a RuntimeClass is updated or deleted, we check for any associated **TrainJob** that is suspended. If it exists, the job will be added to the reconciliation queue.
- `LimitRange` changes. When LimitRange is created, updated, or deleted, we also check for any suspended **TrainJobs** in the affected namespace. These jobs are added to the reconciliation queue to ensure they are re-evaluated based on the new limit range.

Specifically, the Volcano plugin uses `Owns()` and `WatchRawResource()` to register event handlers for the *PodGroup* and other related Kubernetes resources (e.g. *LimitRange*) to TrainJob's Controller Manager. When changes occur in these monitored resources, it triggers the `Reconcile` loop of the TrainJob, which rebuilds objects like *JobSet* and *PodGroup*, and applies the updates to the cluster.

Additionally, we should make sure that the PodGroup is automatically cleaned up when the TrainJob is deleted. We can use Kubernetes `OwnerReferences()` to bind the PodGroup to the TrainJob, ensuring their life cycles are synchronized.

> ### Installation of Volcano plugin
> 
>  **Configure RBAC Permissions**. We should grant Trainer the necessary permissions to manage Volcano CRDs. Permissions can be declared using `+kubebuilder:rbac` annotations inside the runtime plugin code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Configure RBAC Permissions

We should grant Trainer the necessary permissions to manage Volcano CRDs. Permissions can be declared using `+kubebuilder:rbac` annotations inside the runtime plugin code.
```

How about moving this section under "Volcano Runtime Plugin"?

- **Build PodGroups** based on the *Training Runtime* configuration and calculate resource limits (e.g., `MinResource`).
- **Manage PodGroups**
   - Update: Update PodGroups and perform rescheduling when there are changes in cluster resource demands (e.g., changes in `LimitRange`).
   - Suspended/Resumed: Support scheduling for suspended and resumed training jobs, with special handling of suspended jobs to ensure no new pods are started. (TrainJob may be set to suspend in its configuration or manually paused by the user.)
- **Binding**: Bind PodGroups to TrainJobs, with their life cycle controlled by the TrainJob. For example, when a TrainJob is deleted, the associated PodGroup is also deleted.
- **Apply PodGroups to the Cluster**: Submit PodGroup resources and associated scheduling configurations, allowing Volcano to manage pod scheduling.

Note: The plugin is responsible only for configuring scheduling parameters, building and managing PodGroups. The actual scheduling management is handled by external schedulers (**volcano-controller**).

### Volcano Scheduling API

> Currently, scheduling strategy parameters are set in the `PodGroupPolicy` of the `TrainingRuntimeSpec`. We introduce a new configuration struct, `VolcanoPodPolicySource`, which extends the existing `PodGroupPolicySource`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently, scheduling strategy parameters are set in the `PodGroupPolicy` of the `TrainingRuntimeSpec`. We introduce a new configuration struct, `VolcanoPodGroupPolicySource`, which extends the existing `PodGroupPolicySource`:
```

```golang
// Only one of its members may be specified.
type PodGroupPolicySource struct {
        // Coscheduling plugin from the Kubernetes scheduler-plugins for gang-scheduling.
	Coscheduling *CoschedulingPodGroupPolicySource `json:"coscheduling,omitempty"`

	// Volcano plugin from the Volcano scheduler for gang-scheduling and advanced queue-based scheduling.

> 	Volcano      *VolcanoPodPolicySource      `json:"volcano,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	Volcano      *VolcanoPodGroupPolicySource      `json:"volcano,omitempty"`
```

}

// VolcanoPodPolicySource configures scheduling behavior for Volcano.
type VolcanoPodPolicySource struct {
        // Queue name in Volcano. Defaults to "default" queue with the lowest weight.

> 	Queue *string `json:"queue,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: Can we define Queue per TrainJob and how are we going to manage overrides if that is required ?
For example, in Kueue we can leverage labels to override Queue for each submitted TrainJob.

Author: From my perspective, `PodGroupPolicy` serves as the global scheduling template set in `TrainingRuntime` for most TrainJobs. (Common)
If a user needs a custom schedule for a task, they can override it using `Annotations` in the `TrainJob`. (Less common)

Reviewer 2: Yes, but if annotation works for Volcano, we always can add them to the JobSet template in TrainingRuntime.
I just try to understand whether `Queue` API is necessary for `VolcanoPodGroupPolicySource`.

Reviewer: > If we can define Volcano queue inside annotations, what is the reason to have API inside podGroupPolicy 

I think, it's platform engineer's duty to define these scheduling related parameters, or at least provide the default settings so that data scientists do not need to know about it.

> Can we define Queue per TrainJob and how are we going to manage overrides if that is required ?

Please can you elaborate why we need this? AFAIK, we target TrainJob's user as people who are not familiar with configurations concerned with Kubernetes and scheduling.

Reviewer 2: >I think, it's platform engineer's duty to define these scheduling related parameters, or at least provide the default settings so that data scientists do not need to know about it.

I agree with that, and Platform Engineers can set the required annotation using the JobSet template in the TrainingRuntime. This is similar to how they do that for Kueue.

>Please can you elaborate why we need this? AFAIK, we target TrainJob's user as people who are not familiar with configurations concerned with Kubernetes and scheduling.

That's right, but we have PodSpecOverrides API that allows to perform overrides which are necessary for TrainJob execution. This API can be used by other systems (e.g. mutation webhook, SDK clients) to override appropriate parameters in the runtime like VolumeSource.

Author: I think `queue` should be explicitly modeled in `VolcanoPodGroupPolicySource`, since it's already a field in `PodGroupSpec` (in Volcano).

`queue` is a coarse-grained scheduling mechanism and should be defined by platform engineers. 
In contrast, overriding `priorityClassName` per `TrainJob` makes sense: it controls job priority **within the same queue**, giving flexibility without breaking resource partitions.

So from my perspective:
- `queue`: defined in API and managed by platform engineers.
- `priority`: can be optionally overridden by users for in-queue priority control.

Author: <img width="1920" height="1080" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e294dde6-4a32-4f69-8320-0d243940a9e7" />
Maybe this simple example can express my understanding.

Reviewer 3: Empirically, developers specify labels or annotations when integrating with Volcano, as the labels must be appended to the related Pods to enable Queues to identify them via `volcano.sh/queue-name`. It would be more straightforward to keep the same approach between owner Jobs and Pods for specifying the queue. （e.g. [KubeRay](https://docs.ray.io/en/latest/cluster/kubernetes/k8s-ecosystem/volcano.html)）

I think we should also refer to the design of integrations with Kueue. It would be better to have a similar design and process to handle them for integrity. /cc @andreyvelich @Electronic-Waste

Author: After the disscussion, I configue `queue` via annotation `volcano.sh/queue-name`. I've updated the KEP. @andreyvelich @Electronic-Waste @rudeigerc

        // PriorityClassName sets PodGroup priority. Optional.

>         // "system-node-critical" and "system-cluster-critical" are special keywords with the highest priorities.

Reviewer 2: Should this be enums ?

Author: The "system-node-critical" and "system-cluster-critical" are special keywords with the highest priorities, but `PriorityClassName` is open to user-defined values:  
https://github.com/volcano-sh/volcano/blob/2bc86bcdc623c16a6c24bd200cfb9ccf80de2f35/installer/helm/chart/volcano/crd/bases/scheduling.volcano.sh_podgroups.yaml#L109-L117

        PriorityClassName *string `json:"priorityClassName,omitempty"`
}

> 

Reviewer 2: Can you close this code block to appropriately format the KEP ?

https://github.com/kubeflow/trainer/blob/0980c574058c48d79b423189af3c5c09766cea84/docs/proposals/2437-volcano-scheduler/README.md#volcano-scheduling-api

The **PodGroupInterface** is defined in `volcano.sh/apis/pkg/client/clientset/versioned/typed/scheduling/v1beta1`, which provides methods to work with **PodGroup** resources. The PodGroup CRD is managed by the **volcano-controller**.

Now, let’s dive into the specific functionality the Volcano plugin provides.

#### Create PodGroup

**PodGroup** is created based on the policy defined in `runtime.Info`. First, we need to check the existing PodGroup and corresponding TrainJob’s runtime status to determine whether to update the PodGroup. (Update the PodGroup only if it exists and the TrainJob is not suspended.)

Note that the PodGroup spec in **Volcano** differs from the one defined in the Kubernetes **scheduler-plugins**. In the Volcano plugin, the following parameters need to be calculated:

- `MinMember`: Defines the minimum number of members/tasks required to run the PodGroup. This is the total count of all Pods in the PodSet.

> - `MinResources`: Defines the minimal resource of members/tasks to run the pod group. This is the sum of resource requests (such as CPU and memory) for all Pods in the PodSet.

Reviewer 2: What would be the differences between this and co-scheduling ? 
cc @tenzen-y

Author: From my perspective, the **semantics** of `MinMember` and `MinResources` are the same between Volcano and the existing scheduler-plugin.

In terms of implementation:
- scheduler-plugin: these fields control the `PodGroup` status,
https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/scheduler-plugins/blob/b3127ba4cc420430ca5322740103220043697eec/pkg/controllers/podgroup_controller.go#L114-L115
- volcano: these fields are used for job queue admission, which is more complex and queue-aware.
https://github.com/volcano-sh/volcano/blob/0280981b1057022ba7a188678a4f05f3dac00fca/pkg/scheduler/plugins/capacity/capacity.go#L576-L584

> As a supplement, for `MinResources`, Volcano supports deducting scheduling-gated pod resources (i.e., pods not yet running) to avoid overestimating resource usage — a feature not seen in scheduler-plugin (Maybe I missed some related logic).
https://github.com/volcano-sh/volcano/blob/0280981b1057022ba7a188678a4f05f3dac00fca/pkg/scheduler/plugins/capacity/capacity.go#L227-L228

Reviewer 2: Looking at how we calculate `minMember` and `minResources` in coscheduling plugin, it looks similar to what Volcano expects: https://github.com/kubeflow/trainer/blob/master/pkg/runtime/framework/plugins/coscheduling/coscheduling.go#L138-L139

Is this statement accurate in your KEP ?
> Note that the PodGroup spec in **Volcano** differs from the one defined in the Kubernetes **scheduler-plugins**. In the Volcano plugin, the following parameters need to be calculated:

Author: Sorry for the confusion. The "differ" means `Volcano` defines additional fields (such as `minTaskMember`). The calcuation of `minMember` and `minResources` are similar to that of `coscheduling`.

> - `MinTaskMember`: Defines the minimum number of Pods required to run each task in the PodGroup. If not specified, the default is the PodSet.Count.

Reviewer 2: Can you point to the MinTaskMember in the PodGroup docs for Volcano ?
I didn't find it here: https://volcano.sh/en/docs/podgroup/

Reviewer 2: Can we just use `minMembers` without using the `MinTaskMember` API to create PodGroup ?

Author: yes, the field is optional. Since the current `Trainer` does not require fine-grained scheduling guarantees per task, I think `minMember` is sufficient.

#### Handle Resource Events

Referring to implement of **Coscheduling**, we update the scheduling queue in the following two cases:

- `RuntimeClass` changes. If a RuntimeClass is updated or deleted, we check for any associated **TrainJob** that is suspended. If it exists, the job will be added to the reconciliation queue.

> - `LimitRange` changes. When LimitRange is created, updated, or deleted, we also check for any suspended **TrainJobs** in the affected namespace. These jobs are added to the reconciliation queue to ensure they are re-evaluated based on the new limit range.

Reviewer 2: Why do we need to watch for LimitRanges ?

Author: `LimitRange` changes can make some pods schedulable.
Volcano handles this mainly in the VCJob controller. But since we don't use `VCJob`, we need to handle it manually—like in Coscheduling—to re-evaluate suspended TrainJobs.

                      resources:
                        limits:
                          nvidia.com/gpu: 1
                      env:
                        - name: MASTER_ADDR
                          value: "pytorch-node-0-0.pytorch"
                        - name: MASTER_PORT
                          value: 29400
                      command:
                        - torchrun train.py
```

#### Story 2

As a platform engineer, I am familiar with both Kubernetes APIs and Volcano scheduler. I want to optimize my distributed training jobs with advanced scheduling features. My goal is to ensure **high-priority training jobs** get scheduled first while efficiently managing cluster resources for multiple concurrent jobs.

First I will create my Queue in the cluster. The custom Queue may look as follows:

```yaml
apiVersion: scheduling.volcano.sh/v1beta1
kind: Queue
metadata:
  name: high-priority-queue
spec:
  weight: 1
  reclaimable: false
  capability:
    cpu: 2
```

Then I specify the Queue name in ClusterTrainingRuntime spec:

```yaml
podGroupPolicy:
    volcano:
      queue: high-priority-queue
```

## Design Details

> As shown in the workflow diagram above, the Volcano plugin's work includes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As shown in the workflow diagram above, we decide to implement a runtime plugin for Volcano with the Kubeflow Trainer Pipeline Framework. It will:
```

We'd better elaborate "what is the plugin" in Design Details. WDYT?

> - Build PodGroups based on the *Training Runtime* configuration and calculate resource limits (e.g., `MinResource`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Build PodGroups** based on the *Training Runtime* configuration and calculate resource limits (e.g., `MinResource`).
```

For emphasis:)

> - Manage PodGroups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Manage PodGroups**
```

Same as above

>    - Update PodGroups and perform rescheduling when there are changes in cluster resource demands (e.g., changes in `LimitRange`).
>    - Support scheduling for suspended and resumed training jobs, with special handling of suspended jobs to ensure no new pods are started. (TrainJob may be set to suspend in its configuration or manually paused by the user.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Update: Update PodGroups and perform rescheduling when there are changes in cluster resource demands (e.g., changes in `LimitRange`).
   - Suspended/Resumed: Support scheduling for suspended and resumed training jobs, with special handling of suspended jobs to ensure no new pods are started. (TrainJob may be set to suspend in its configuration or manually paused by the user.)
```

Does adding these sub-titles better? WDYT @Doris-xm

> - Bind PodGroups to TrainJobs, with their life cycle controlled by the TrainJob. For example, when a TrainJob is deleted, the associated PodGroup is also deleted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Binding**: Bind PodGroups to TrainJobs, with their life cycle controlled by the TrainJob. For example, when a TrainJob is deleted, the associated PodGroup is also deleted.
```

> - Integrate with Volcano control components, submitting tasks to the Volcano Scheduler for scheduling.

Reviewer: As you mentioned below, the actual scheduling process is handled by volcano. So, why we need to "Integrate with Volcano control components" here? 

I guess, maybe what you mean is "Applying PodGroups to cluster"?

Note: The plugin is responsible only for configuring scheduling parameters, building and managing PodGroups. The actual scheduling management is handled by external schedulers (**volcano-controller**).

### Volcano Scheduling API

Currently, scheduling strategy parameters are set in the `PodGroupPolicy` of the `TrainingRuntimeSpec`. We need to integrate Volcano as an optional scheduler plugin.

Specifically, we create a new structure, `VolcanoPodPolicySource`, to store the Volcano scheduling configuration in `pkg/api/trainer/trainingruntime_type.go`. It will be added as an additional option within the `PodGroupPolicySource`, alongside Coscheduling. The key fields to configure are as follows:

* `Queue`: The queue name used in Volcano. Defaults to the “default” queue, which has the lowest weight.

> * `PriorityClassName`: If specified, this indicates the PodGroup’s priority. (For example, "system-node-critical" and "system-cluster-critical" are special keywords that indicate the highest priorities, with the former being the highest.) This field is optional.

Reviewer: How about creating a code blocks to elaborate the detailed design?

https://github.com/kubeflow/trainer/blob/b71a69064fa033c2ca51f6a24dbe199b552cada9/docs/proposals/2170-kubeflow-trainer-v2/README.md?plain=1#L1032-L1051

- `RuntimeClass` changes. If a RuntimeClass is updated or deleted, we check for any associated **TrainJob** that is suspended. If it exists, the job will be added to the reconciliation queue.
- `LimitRange` changes. When LimitRange is created, updated, or deleted, we also check for any suspended **TrainJobs** in the affected namespace. These jobs are added to the reconciliation queue to ensure they are re-evaluated based on the new limit range.

Specifically, the Volcano plugin uses `Owns()` and `WatchRawResource()` to register event handlers for the *PodGroup* and other related Kubernetes resources (e.g. *LimitRange*) to TrainJob's Controller Manager. When changes occur in these monitored resources, it triggers the `Reconcile` loop of the TrainJob, which rebuilds objects like *JobSet* and *PodGroup*, and applies the updates to the cluster.

Additionally, we should make sure that the PodGroup is automatically cleaned up when the TrainJob is deleted. We can use Kubernetes `OwnerReferences()` to bind the PodGroup to the TrainJob, ensuring their life cycles are synchronized.

### Installation of Volcano plugin

The main installation steps are as follows:

> 1. **Install Volcano** (users must install it beforehand). A deployment YAML file ([volcano-development.yaml](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/volcano-sh/volcano/release-1.10/installer/volcano-development.yaml)) is provided. The key CRDs include *PodGroup*, *Queue*. The main control components include *controller-manager*, *admission*, and *scheduler*.

Reviewer: Shall we add the volcano manifest to Trainer's manifest?

WDYT? @Doris-xm @andreyvelich @tenzen-y @astefanutti @rudeigerc

> 2. **Modify the RBAC permissions in the manifest.** We should ensure that Trainer has the necessary management rights for the Volcano PodGroup, Queue CRD.

Reviewer: We do not need to modify the RBAC permission directly in the manifest. In fact, we'll:

1. Add some annotations in the runtime plugin, Like:

https://github.com/kubeflow/trainer/blob/b71a69064fa033c2ca51f6a24dbe199b552cada9/pkg/runtime/framework/plugins/coscheduling/coscheduling.go#L71

2. Run `make manifest` to update RBAC permission automatically

https://github.com/kubeflow/trainer/blob/b71a69064fa033c2ca51f6a24dbe199b552cada9/Makefile#L114-L121

                        requests:
                          cpu: "1000m"
                          memory: "2Gi"
                          nvidia.com/gpu: 1
                      env:
                        - name: MASTER_ADDR
                          value: "pytorch-node-0-0.pytorch"
                        - name: MASTER_PORT
                          value: 29400
                      command:
                        - torchrun train.py
```

#### Story 2

As a platform engineer, I am familiar with both Kubernetes APIs and Volcano scheduler. I want to optimize my distributed training jobs with advanced scheduling features. My goal is to ensure **high-priority training jobs** get scheduled first while efficiently managing cluster resources for multiple concurrent jobs.

First I will create my Queue in the cluster. The custom Queue may look as follows:

```yaml
apiVersion: scheduling.volcano.sh/v1beta1
kind: Queue
metadata:
  name: high-priority-queue
spec:
  weight: 1
  reclaimable: false
  capability:
    cpu: 2
```

Then I specify the Queue name in ClusterTrainingRuntime spec:

```yaml
spec:
  podGroupPolicy:
    volcano: {}
  template:
    metadata:

>       scheduling.volcano.sh/queue-name: "high-priority-queue"

Reviewer 2: The TrainJob will override this label, as we discussed before: https://github.com/kubeflow/trainer/blob/master/pkg/apis/trainer/v1alpha1/trainjob_types.go#L107
@Doris-xm It would be nice to mention it explicitly in the KEP.

>       scheduling.volcano.sh/queue-name: "high-priority-queue"

Reviewer 4: SGTM

Note: The plugin is responsible only for configuring scheduling parameters, building and managing PodGroups. The actual scheduling management is handled by external schedulers (**volcano-controller**).

### Volcano Scheduling API

Currently, scheduling strategy parameters are set in the `PodGroupPolicy` of the `TrainingRuntimeSpec`. We introduce a new configuration struct, `VolcanoPodGroupPolicySource`, which extends the existing `PodGroupPolicySource`:

```golang
// Only one of its members may be specified.
type PodGroupPolicySource struct {
        // Coscheduling plugin from the Kubernetes scheduler-plugins for gang-scheduling.
	Coscheduling *CoschedulingPodGroupPolicySource `json:"coscheduling,omitempty"`

	// Volcano plugin from the Volcano scheduler for gang-scheduling and advanced queue-based scheduling.
	Volcano      *VolcanoPodGroupPolicySource      `json:"volcano,omitempty"`
}

// VolcanoPodPolicySource configures scheduling behavior for Volcano.
type VolcanoPodPolicySource struct {
        // NetworkTopology defines the NetworkTopology config, this field works in conjunction with network topology feature and hyperNode CRD.

>         NetworkTopology *volcanov1beta1.NetworkTopologySpec `json:"networkTopology,omitempty"`

Author: We only configure `HighestTierAllowed` and `NetworkTopologyMode` in `VolcanoPodPolicySource. NetworkTopology`. I think HyperNode changing won't affect anything in Trainer.

>         NetworkTopology *volcanov1beta1.NetworkTopologySpec `json:"networkTopology,omitempty"`

Reviewer 4: Thanks. SGTM

}
```

### Volcano Runtime Plugin

Similar to the Coscheduling plugin, we define the Volcano plugin struct in `pkg/runtime/framework/plugins/volcano/volcano.go`. This struct includes key fields like `client`, `restMapper`, `scheme`, and `logger`.During initialization, we need to set indexes for *TrainingRuntime* and *ClusterTrainingRuntime* to support efficient queries.

> The **PodGroupInterface** is defined in `volcano.sh/apis/pkg/client/clientset/versioned/typed/scheduling/v1beta1`, which provides methods to work with **PodGroup** resources. The PodGroup CRD is managed by the **volcano-controller**.

Author: Yes. We don't need `PodGroupInterface` here, which is used internally by Volcano Controller. I will fix it.

- `LimitRange` changes. When LimitRange is created, updated, or deleted, we also check for any suspended **TrainJobs** in the affected namespace. These jobs are added to the reconciliation queue to ensure they are re-evaluated based on the new limit range.

Specifically, the Volcano plugin uses `Owns()` and `WatchRawResource()` to register event handlers for the *PodGroup* and other related Kubernetes resources (e.g. *LimitRange*) to TrainJob's Controller Manager. When changes occur in these monitored resources, it triggers the `Reconcile` loop of the TrainJob, which rebuilds objects like *JobSet* and *PodGroup*, and applies the updates to the cluster.

Additionally, we should make sure that the PodGroup is automatically cleaned up when the TrainJob is deleted. We can use Kubernetes `OwnerReferences()` to bind the PodGroup to the TrainJob, ensuring their life cycles are synchronized.

#### Configure RBAC Permissions

We should grant Trainer the necessary permissions to manage Volcano CRDs. Permissions can be declared using `+kubebuilder:rbac` annotations inside the runtime plugin code.

> 

Author: I've described it in another section. @tenzen-y 

https://github.com/kubeflow/trainer/blob/49464cc50cf68585ee6d2cd6a17a5114840b3746/docs/proposals/2437-volcano-scheduler/README.md?plain=1#L205-L228

# KEP-2437: Support Volcano Scheduler

## Summary

This document outlines a proposal to support Volcano for gang-scheduling in Kubeflow Trainer, so as to provide users with more AI-specific scheduling capacities like priority scheduling and queue resource management. Thanks to the [Kubeflow Trainer Pipeline Framework,](https://github.com/kubeflow/trainer/tree/master/docs/proposals/2170-kubeflow-trainer-v2#pipeline-framework) we can seamlessly integrate Volcano into Kubeflow Trainer as a runtime plugin.

## Motivation

**Kubeflow Trainer** is a core component of the Kubeflow ecosystem, responsible for managing and executing distributed training jobs. In distributed training scenarios, an efficient **scheduling mechanism** is crucial:

> - A distributed training job typically involves multiple pods (such as parameter servers and worker nodes) running in coordination. To avoid the resource wastage, all pods need to be started at the same time. That’s why **Gang Scheduling** matters.

Author: Thanks for reviewing. I will take the `torchrun` training process as an example.

### Goals

1. **Integrate Volcano Scheduler into Kubeflow Trainer.** Integrate the **Volcano** scheduler plugin into Trainer to support Gang Scheduling and resource management for distributed training jobs.
2. **Support some advanced scheduling features**. Provide some advanced scheduling features, such as prioritizing high-priority jobs and assigning specific queues.
3. **Provide user guidance**. Update the user-guide documentation with appropriate usage examples.

### Non-Goals

1. **Replace the existing Coscheduling plugin**. We maintain compatibility with the current scheduling plugin, allowing users to opt for Volcano scheduling.
2. **Modifying Volcano's core scheduling logic.** No modifications or control over the internal scheduling algorithms or mechanisms of the Volcano scheduler itself.
3. **Integration with VolcanoJob (vcjob).** This proposal will not integrate with vcjob or manage the lifecycle of vcjob within the Volcano ecosystem. We support only PodGroup-based scheduling.

## Proposal

> We plan to integrate Volcano into Kubeflow Trainer as a runtime plugin, following the best practice of [Kubeflow Trainer Pipeline Framework](https://github.com/kubeflow/trainer/tree/master/docs/proposals/2170-kubeflow-trainer-v2#pipeline-framework). This plugin-based design allows users to switch to the Volcano scheduler without reinstalling or modifying the core Trainer component, making the integration more modular, flexible, and user-friendly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We plan to integrate Volcano into Kubeflow Trainer as a runtime plugin, following the best practice of [Kubeflow Trainer Pipeline Framework](https://github.com/kubeflow/trainer/tree/master/docs/proposals/2170-kubeflow-trainer-v2#pipeline-framework). This plugin-based design allows users to switch to Volcano scheduler without reinstalling or modifying the core Trainer component, making the integration more modular, flexible, and user-friendly.
```

> PodGroup is used as the basic scheduling unit. It is created based on the scheduling parameters specified in *Training Runtime*. Then the control components of Volcano implement the scheduling and management of the pods. This is similar to the approach used in Training Operator V1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PodGroup is the basic scheduling unit. It is created based on the scheduling parameters specified in *Training Runtime*, after which Volcano will manages and schedule the pods specified in the PodGroup. This is similar to the approach used in Training Operator V1.
```

> The diagram below shows how the Volcano plugin is integrated into the TrainJob creation workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The diagram below shows how Volcano is integrated into the TrainJob creation workflow.
```

![user-roles](./user-roles-scheduler.drawio.svg)

As shown in the diagram, users can utilize advanced scheduling in two ways:

1. By specifying the scheduling spec when customizing *ClusterTrainingRuntime* / *TrainRuntime*. Suitable for platform engineers who are familiar with the Kubernetes API and the Volcano scheduler.

> 2. By choosing a *TrainingRuntime* with a specific scheduling method in the *TrainJob*. Suitable for data scientists who don't need to understand the underlying implementation details.

Reviewer: I think, the two ways you mentioned above are not two separate process. In fact, platform engineer creates and manages the CTRs/TRs, from which data scientists will choose one and apply a TrainJob over that. So, it's a single process. WDYT? @Doris-xm

Reviewer: FYR, you can describe it in temporal order, like:

1. First, Platform Engineers...
2. Then, Data Scientists will choose and...

For the detailed expression, you could refer to: https://github.com/kubeflow/trainer/issues/2437#issuecomment-2690101139

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a platform engineer, I am familiar with Kubernetes APIs. I want to implement Gang Scheduling for my distributed training jobs to ensure that all tasks within a training job are scheduled together on the cluster.

The ClusterTrainingRuntime may look as follows:

```yaml
apiVersion: trainer.kubeflow.org/v2alpha1
kind: ClusterTrainingRuntime
metadata:
  name: torch-distributed-gang-scheduling
spec:
  mlPolicy:
    numNodes: 2
    torch:
      numProcPerNode: 5
  podGroupPolicy:
    volcano:
      minResources:

>     	  cpu: "1"

Reviewer 2: We should update it.

Note: The plugin is responsible only for configuring scheduling parameters, building and managing PodGroups. The actual scheduling management is handled by external schedulers (**volcano-controller**).

### Volcano Scheduling API

Currently, scheduling strategy parameters are set in the `PodGroupPolicy` of the `TrainingRuntimeSpec`. We introduce a new configuration struct, `VolcanoPodGroupPolicySource`, which extends the existing `PodGroupPolicySource`:

```golang
// Only one of its members may be specified.
type PodGroupPolicySource struct {
        // Coscheduling plugin from the Kubernetes scheduler-plugins for gang-scheduling.
	Coscheduling *CoschedulingPodGroupPolicySource `json:"coscheduling,omitempty"`

	// Volcano plugin from the Volcano scheduler for gang-scheduling and advanced queue-based scheduling.
	Volcano      *VolcanoPodGroupPolicySource      `json:"volcano,omitempty"`
}

// VolcanoPodPolicySource configures scheduling behavior for Volcano.
type VolcanoPodPolicySource struct {
        // PriorityClassName sets PodGroup priority. Optional.
        // "system-node-critical" and "system-cluster-critical" are special keywords with the highest priorities.

>         PriorityClassName *string `json:"priorityClassName,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: For the PriorityClassName, can we leverage the Pod API directly: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/pod-priority-preemption/#pod-priority ?
E.g. read the Job's Pod `.spec.priorityClassName`, and create Volcano PodGroup using it.

Reviewer: That sounds good to me. In that case, we can avoid additional fields in `VolcanoPodPolicySource`, and reuse the kubernetes native APIs.

WDYT? @Doris-xm @rudeigerc

Reviewer 2: We might still require this API, so users can set the desired scheduler as follows:
```yaml
apiVersion: trainer.kubeflow.org/v2alpha1
kind: ClusterTrainingRuntime
metadata:
  name: torch-distributed-gang-scheduling
spec:
  podGroupPolicy:
    volcano: {}
  mlPolicy:
    numNodes: 2
```

@tenzen-y @astefanutti Any concerns with the above API ?

Reviewer: > If we keep NetworkTopology API in podGroupPolicy, do we still need enabled for explicit control?

Maybe we need this, because not every users need `NetworkTopology` field.

Author: Does the field `enabled` means:
- If any field (`NetworkTopology`) is set under `podGroupPolicy.volcano`, the Volcano plugin will be considered enabled. 
- However, for clarity and explicit control, we recommend setting `enabled: true` to avoid ambiguity.

@Electronic-Waste

Reviewer: > Don't we fill redundant to specify enable: false in the PodGroupPolicy API ?

Redundancy is needed if we want more readability. Here're several advantages adopting `enabled`:

1. Readability: true/false is more explicit than `{}`, making intent clearer to users.
2. Extensibility: It allows disabling a scheduler while retaining its config for future use.
3. Helm compatibility: Explicit bool switch `enabled: true/false` is more recommended, rather than `{}`

        // NetworkTopology defines the NetworkTopology config, this field works in conjunction with network topology feature and hyperNode CRD.

>         NetworkTopology *volcanov1beta1.NetworkTopologySpec `json:"networkTopology,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: Are we going to support topology aware scheduling in the first release of Volcano plugin ?

Reviewer: I think, maybe in the first release, we can just support queue and priority class. But I have no objections for adding topology aware scheduling.

It's worthing noticing that, if we remove `Queue` and `PriorityClassName` from the `VolcanoPodGroupPolicySource`, there are no explicit way to activate Volcano Plugin. So, maybe we need a `Enabled` field?

Reviewer 5: @JesseStutler do you have a good link to describe how Volcano handles network topology (does it handle other kinds of topology too, like NUMA node mapping?)

#### Volcano Scheduler Plugin Configuration

To enable features like [network topology-aware](https://volcano.sh/en/docs/network_topology_aware_scheduling/#configure-the-volcano-scheduler) scheduling, users need to modify the Volcano scheduler’s configuration and enable [plugins](https://volcano.sh/en/docs/plugins).
For example, the following configuration is recommended when using Trainer with Volcano integration:

```yaml
kind: ConfigMap
apiVersion: v1
metadata:
  name: volcano-scheduler-configmap
  namespace: volcano-system
data:
  volcano-scheduler.conf: |
    actions: "enqueue, allocate, backfill"
    tiers:
    - plugins:
      - name: priority  # Handles job or task sorting based on PriorityClassName, createTime or id in turn
      - name: gang  # Gang scheduling strategy
    - plugins:
      - name: predicates  # Evaluate and pre-select jobs by the PredicateGPU
      - name: proportion  # Filter out those that require the GPU for centralized scheduling
      - name: binpack  # Help with compact task scheduling
      - name: network-topology-aware  # Enable network-topology-aware plugin

> ```

Reviewer 4: Awesome!
